Yes, the database design you've shared appears to be normalized, particularly adhering to the principles of Third Normal Form (3NF), which is a common goal for relational databases. Here's why:

Entities and Attributes:

Each table (e.g., admin, address, contact_details, basic_details) represents a distinct entity with its own attributes.
No attributes are repeating groups, and each column in a table stores a single piece of information.
Primary Keys:

Each table has a primary key that uniquely identifies each record (e.g., id in admin, address_id in address, contact_details_id in contact_details, basic_details_id in basic_details).
Foreign Keys:

The admin table uses foreign keys (address_id, basic_details_id, contact_details_id) to reference related records in other tables, establishing relationships between entities without redundancy.
No Partial Dependencies (2NF):

All non-key attributes are fully dependent on the primary key. For example, in the basic_details table, attributes like first_name, last_name, etc., are all dependent on basic_details_id.
No Transitive Dependencies (3NF):

Non-key attributes are not dependent on other non-key attributes. For instance, in the basic_details table, the password does not depend on first_name but only on basic_details_id.
This structure minimizes redundancy and prevents anomalies during data operations like insertions, updates, and deletions, ensuring data integrity across the database.

However, further normalization might be possible if there are additional functional dependencies or if certain tables can be split into smaller ones, but based on the provided schema, it appears well-normalized for typical use cases.

what happens when we combine all these tables into one admin table, then is it normalized ?
ChatGPT
Combining all these tables into a single admin table would lead to a denormalized structure, which can introduce several issues related to data redundancy, integrity, and maintenance. Let's break down the implications:

1. Data Redundancy:
Repetition of Data: If all attributes from address, basic_details, and contact_details are moved into the admin table, there would be repetition of the same data if multiple admins share the same address, basic details, or contact information. This leads to unnecessary duplication of data.
Increased Storage: The storage requirement would increase significantly as the same information is stored multiple times for different records.
2. Update Anomalies:
Inconsistent Data: If an address or contact information changes for one admin, you would need to update multiple records. If any record is missed during the update, it would lead to inconsistent data within the database.
Difficulty in Maintenance: Updating shared information like address or contact_details would become more error-prone and cumbersome, leading to potential data integrity issues.
3. Insert Anomalies:
Insertion of Partial Data: You might be forced to insert redundant or null data. For example, if you want to add a new admin who hasn't provided all their details yet, you might have to insert NULL values for those fields, which could complicate querying and processing.
4. Delete Anomalies:
Accidental Data Loss: Deleting a record from the admin table might result in the loss of valuable information that could be shared by other admins. For instance, if an admin with a particular address is deleted, the address is lost for other admins who might share it.
5. Normalization Principles Violated:
First Normal Form (1NF): Although 1NF would still be maintained (as all fields contain atomic values), the table would become wider and more complex, with a high likelihood of repeating groups if data is duplicated.
Second Normal Form (2NF): This form would be violated because non-key attributes would depend on only part of the composite primary key. For example, city, state, country are related to address rather than the admin itself.
Third Normal Form (3NF): This form would be violated because there would be transitive dependencies—non-key attributes would depend on other non-key attributes rather than solely on the primary key.
Example of the Issues:
If you combine everything into one table:

sql
Copy code
CREATE TABLE admin (
    id INT PRIMARY KEY,
    last_login DATE,
    last_password_change DATE,
    adr_line1 VARCHAR(255),
    adr_line2 VARCHAR(255),
    city VARCHAR(255),
    state VARCHAR(255),
    country VARCHAR(255),
    zipcode VARCHAR(255),
    birth_date DATE,
    first_name VARCHAR(255),
    gender VARCHAR(255),
    last_name VARCHAR(255),
    password VARCHAR(255),
    role VARCHAR(255),
    user_name VARCHAR(255),
    contact_number VARCHAR(255),
    email VARCHAR(255),
    url VARCHAR(255)
);
This structure would lead to:

Repeating the same address or contact details for every admin sharing those details.
Updating the address for one admin would require updating it for every admin that shares that address.
Deleting an admin could inadvertently remove the only record of an address.
Conclusion:
By combining all tables into one, the database becomes denormalized, introducing redundancy and various anomalies. Normalization helps to ensure data consistency, reduce redundancy, and improve the maintainability of the database. Therefore, it is generally advisable to keep the tables separate as per the normalized design rather than combining them into a single table.